---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-04-06T03:46:38.767Z'
dateModified: '2016-04-06T03:46:36.207Z'
title: ''
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-04-06-5fb0f9d5-e98b-4650-8f39-ffc3d40b05cd.md
published: true
url: 5fb0f9d5-e98b-4650-8f39-ffc3d40b05cd/index.html
_type: Article

---
**South African Journal of International Affairs  Vol. 19:3\. 2012\. PP. 409-411\. ​**

​The Scramble for Africa in the 21st Century: From the Old World to the New, edited 

by Harry Stephan and Michael Power, Cape Town, Renaissance Press, 2012, 456 

pp., $9.99 (ebook) ISBN 9780987022004 

In this follow-up to their previous collaboration The Scramble for Africa in the 21st Century: A View from the South, Harry Stephan and Michael Power have produced an updated look at the continent. The newest edition follows the same structure and argument as the 2006 edition, but tells of an Africa that has witnessed major changes over the past five years. Stephan, a University of Cape Town-based academic and 

manager of a large company, and Power, a global strategist at Investec, South Africa, 

are more than suited to the challenge of producing a book of this nature, given 

their experience in the business world, which no doubt improves the analysis of the 

relevant theories of African political economy. 

The central thesis of this book is that, with the emergence of China as a major 

power and the re-emergence of a multi-polar international system, African states will 

be in a position to argue for better trade terms among the competing powers. Much 

of the book focuses on Africa's economic history as a supplier of commodities and 

on the international economic regime, run by the Bretton Woods system of the World 

Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organisation (WTO), 

which has pushed Washington Consensus policies onto developing countries to the 

detriment of those countries' economies. However, as Stephan states, 'if the United 

States begins to lose its hegemonic status to a multi-polar system, a new reality could 

emerge which may not support the current consensus that has originated through 

Washington' (p. 20). 

The book progresses through several stages in examining this possible change. 

The first chapters are by Michael Power. Power starts by re-affirming the central 

thesis of the book \* that Africa can, and should, look towards the East for further 

economic development, rather than continuing to look to the West. The reasoning 

behind this is that, in the current Western-dominated global economy, Africa has 

been commoditised, whereas in a global economy with the East as the centre, it 

has not. Power lays out in great detail the life cycle of a product \* from monopoly 

to commodity \* and then uses six different case studies, ranging from Microsoft 

to Ford to Gillette, to explain how products eventually become commoditised. 

This chapter was based on Power's 2002 master's thesis at the University of Cape 

Town, although he has added updates on each company for 2011\. He compares 

Africa with Cargill, a company that markets, processes and distributes agricultural, 

food, financial and industrial products. In 2002, Power believed Cargill to be in the 

sixth and final round of a product life cycle, the 'Sinking Ship'. He asks the question, 

'does the company have a secure future?' and concludes that for 'the likes of Cargill, 

the end will most likely come when the family decide to pull the plug' (p. 106). 

However, in 2011, Power was proven incorrect, as Cargill was healthier than it had 

been in 2002, thanks to Chinese demand for resources that it supplies. He posits 

that Africa can do the same as Cargill and use Chinese demand as a stepping 

stone to greater investment in the continent and increased economic development. 

Power continues this Afro-optimism in his next chapter and comes to the same 

conclusion \* Africa can only escape the commoditisation trap via China. These two 

chapters, which comprise almost a third of the entire book, are extremely in-depth 

with many graphs and statistics to prove the argument. However, there is a definite 

lack of focus on Africa, as it is rarely mentioned in the chapters, except in the 

introduction and conclusion to tie it to Power's original work. That said, Power 

uses his extensive knowledge of economics effectively to show that, for Africa, like 

Cargill, it is not yet time to 'pull the plug'. 

The Scramble for Africa then moves away from an emphasis on macro- and 

microeconomics towards an analysis of the international political economy, 

examining the role that institutions such as the WTO play in the international 

trading system. As with the chapters penned by Power, this chapter by Raymond 

Steenkamp Fonseca does not focus solely on the situation in Africa, but gives a 

very broad and informative history of world trade institutions, starting with the 

Bretton Woods institutions and their evolution via many United Nations 

Conference on Trade and Development rounds, the New International Economic 

Order and the evolution of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade into the 

WTO. At the end of the chapter, there is an analysis of the role of Brazil, India and 

South Africa and their multilateral agreements (such as IBSA), although the major 

focus is on the role that the WTO plays in the global economy and the inherent 

bias towards the North which disadvantages those states in the South. The author's 

conclusion, that the WTO needs to be re-examined and rethought to better ensure 

fair treatment for those in the South, may seem idealistic to those with a realist 

stance, but, like the other chapters, the Afro-optimism is tempered by the 

admittance by the authors that the continent is still in transition and implementa- 

tion is still far in the future. 

This issue of an unequal international economy is expanded upon in the 

following chapter on economic globalisation, arguing that the economic integration 

that has occurred because of neo-liberal principles and 'one-size-fits-all' capitalism 

has diverged significantly from what it was originally supposed to achieve. This is 

one of the first chapters of the book that really analyses the issue from an African 

perspective, as Stephan and co-author Michael Bridgman use Regime Theory and 

Two-Level Games to explain how Africa may be able to overcome its traditional 

hardships. The theories reinforce the basic argument of the book: that the current 

economic regime, as detailed in the previous chapter, is detrimental to African 

development. However, the rise of a secondary power, namely China, could alter the 

current economic regime, led by the Washington Consensus, and the shift towards a 

Beijing Consensus in Africa may cause those in the West to adapt to this new regime 

to remain a player on the continent. As Stephan notes, 'perhaps it was not aid that 

was the trouble . . . \[but\] rather it was the prevailing style of aid which robbed Africa 

of its autonomy and sovereignty' (p. 291). This is important for African leaders, 

who according to Putnam's theory, have been playing on two game boards, one 

national and one international. Leaders, such as Mbeki from South Africa, 

struggled to please their domestic support base (notably labour), as well as the 

international investors, who demanded neo-liberal conditions in return for 

investment. With China now emerging on the scene, leaders will be less forced to 

alter domestic policy in return for international investment. Stephan does deal 

briefly with the issue of irresponsible governments in Africa, which many could 

(and would) argue are equally to blame for Africa's woes, conceding at the end of 

the chapter that 'the success of African countries is contingent upon African leaders 

recognising their responsibility for the respective populations and the alleviation of 

poverty' (p. 297). 

​

The penultimate chapter looks at how these leaders are dealing with the markets

which are embedded in globalisation and neo-liberalism, via regional organisations 

such as the Southern African Development Community and the East African 

Community. Like the other chapters, Angus Fane Hervey and Rochella Schollij 

continue the Afro-optimist theme, despite the fact that many of the attempts at 

regional organisation on the continent have fallen far short of expectations. They 

point out, however, that 'regionalism, if given the space it deserves to develop and 

flourish in the continent, may not be a panacea, but can contribute, without dispute, 

to Africa's growth and development in significant ways' (p. 359). This leads to the 

book's conclusion, by Stephan and Jessica Benjamin, which gives a political analysis 

of the problems Africa faces, as opposed to the overly economic analyses of the other 

chapters. The conclusion is simple: governments must invest in human capital to 

continue to attract private investment. 

Overall, this book is ideal for post-graduate students or those with a firm 

grounding in economic theory and African politics. It may be a little technical for 

those with only a mild interest in the subject, especially the first chapters by 

Michael Power, which delve into advanced economic theory. The book is well 

structured and builds upon the authors' argument that the time is now for Africa 

and, with a few changes in thinking by its leaders, real economic development could 

be imminent, thanks to the rise of China as a major power in the international 

system. Some may find this book too optimistic since it only briefly covers the 

disadvantages of Chinese investment and influence in Africa. However, despite the 

fact that the theory, case studies and statistics may be outside the average reader's 

realm, many will appreciate a serious book that is optimistic about the future of the 

African continent. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10220461.2012.741370 

Shawn Robert Duthie 

Political Studies Department, University of Cape Town, 

South Africa 

Email: shawn.duthie@uct.ac.za 

\# 2012, Shawn Robert Duthie 

​