---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-04-06T03:51:53.128Z'
dateModified: '2016-04-06T03:51:52.757Z'
title: POl 5032 Week II
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-04-06-pol-5032-week-ii.md
published: true
url: pol-5032-week-ii/index.html
_type: Article

---
Can you explain Susan Strange's Finance structure in terms of the Bretton Woods institutions?  What are the fundamental changes that have occurred within the financial structure since WWII and how does the financial structure play out within the international financial system today?

The question really points to where we are intellectually trying to end up. As a point of departure we have to look at the evolution of Bretton Woods and understand the nature of the Unholy Trinity since Nixon delinked the Dollar from US Gold reserves.  That's a given.  Today Michael Power provides the tools to map the position of each nation state in terms of the product life cycle.  If we take Michael's ideas a step further, we can map each nation state in terms of their respective populations.  So if we look at Japan, it really is geriatric in relationship to the youth of the states of Africa. Thus, controlling the finance structure has implications on how states maneuver on pensions and health, for example.  Today, Africa has a huge advantage, and Europe is really interesting.  How will states control state funds?  How will Europe control state deficits?  How will Europe solve its Euro crisis, especially on the periphery in Greece, Italy, and Spain and eventually in France?

In the recent past, the BRICS have been the darlings of the financial world while the developed world struggled with debt, growth and stagnation. With US tapering, those states that have relied on their capital accounts to fund current accounts deficits are beginning to struggle, and China, with a growth forecast at 7.5% is probably the exception, as it begins to rebalance its economy.

So where are we going, and when we move on 'optimal currency areas' and the development of the Euro, will we see Mundell as the new Pied Piper?